[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
We pick up our story
of occult America with the
return of the secret teachings.
Perhaps one of the
greatest mystical minds
walking the reading halls of
the New York Public Library
was a young man
named Manly P. Hall.
We're going to pick up our
story there after we go back
and take a look at the
Afro-American mystical roots,
because that's a
part of the story.
We got cut off last time.
And it's so important.
We need to bring this back in.
Then we'll go to Manly.
So we're going to
start with a man--
and welcome back.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ: Thank you.
>>REGINA: --named Frederick
Douglass and his master, Covey,
and what happened to this
man, how he broke free,
and what he was able to
teach his people of the day.
>>HOROWITZ: Now, this is
an extraordinary chapter
in American history.
And it's another of these places
where the resources are there.
The documentation can be
found, but it requires
us to reorient our perspective.
Because we don't often
associate the history,
say, of abolitionism--
and Frederick
Douglass was probably
the greatest abolitionist
figure in our nation's history--
with the occult. But the
two overlap one another
as the occult does with so
many things in American life.
And the episode can be found, if
one knows how to understand it,
directly in Frederick
Douglass's memoirs.
He wrote three memoirs.
They were substantially similar.
But sometimes he would add
some additional information,
or emphasize, or
de-emphasize something.
In each of Douglass's
three memoirs,
he tells the extraordinary
story, the turning point
of his life, where, at age
15, as you were referencing,
he fights back against Covey,
this very vicious, sadistic
slave master.
And Douglass, at that
point in his life,
says that fighting back against
this tyrannical, horrible
figure gave him a sense
of his own inner worth,
and that he was, at that point,
spiritually free, so to speak,
and that he vowed--
he vowed-- that it would
only be a matter of time
until he was physically free,
and that this was the turning
point of his life.
It gave him a sense of selfhood.
Now, right there within all
three of Douglass's memoirs,
he writes about meeting
an old African medicine
man named Sandy Jenkins.
And Sandy Jenkins
gives him a root,
which he says will give
him strength and confidence
to fight back against
this slave master.
Now, as I write about
in "Occult America,"
if you understand the
African-American tradition
of magic called Hoodoo--
Hoodoo, with an H, not Voodoo,
with which it's often confused.
But Hoodoo is a home-grown
African-American religion that
consists of spellwork and a
variety of occult techniques,
some of which--
>>REGINA: Including roots,
and herbs, and so forth, yeah.
>>HOROWITZ: Roots, and
herbs, and herbal healing,
and so forth--
some of these
things are probably
retentions from
ancient African faith.
And some are ideas that
people came to on their own
or borrowed from
other faiths that they
encountered in the New World
while they were enslaved here.
And Sandy Jenkins, this
African medicine man,
as Frederick Douglass refers
to him with veneration,
gave him this root,
which is probably
Jalap root or something that
was known as John the Conqueror,
John the Conqueror
root, which is
sort of like a
hard, bulbous root
that-- you couldn't even
crush it if you squeezed it
with all your might.
And people would keep it, and
still do, in their pockets
for virility,
strength, confidence.
And Douglass writes
that this root gave him
some sense of confidence.
And he said he
wondered-- he wondered--
if the root, maybe, had
influenced him in some way,
psychological or in
some larger unseen way,
if maybe Sandy's belief
systems, which Douglas himself
didn't particularly
subscribe to--
he was somebody who
sort of got worried
about people getting
into folk religion.
And he wanted to be educated
along different lines.
But he said, I had to concede--
I had to concede--
that maybe a ray
of Sandy's beliefs,
and maybe something more,
cast itself upon me,
and that this root gave me
the confidence to do what
I needed to do.
Now, people read this,
historians, biographers
read this.
They don't know how
to contextualize it.
They just think,
oh, you know, it's
just some superstitious thing.
And some local guy
gave him a root.
It comes from a very
finely-worked-out
religious tradition
called Hoodoo,
which was an African retentive
faith that was practiced,
first, among slaves,
and today, is still
practiced all over America.
It's a form of ceremonial magic.
It's something that
is so fundamental
a part of American
life that we can almost
lose sight of the
root work that it
created throughout our nation.
It's right there, this
episode straight out
of the history of Hoodoo, in
Frederick Douglass's memoirs.
One just needs to know
how to look for it.
And he wrote about
it with veneration.
>>REGINA: So after he used
the root, what happened?
>>HOROWITZ: He was able to
fight back against Covey.
Covey was not able to physically
get the better of him.
The two men struggled
for two hours.
I shouldn't say men.
Covey was--
>>REGINA: Was a boy.
>>HOROWITZ: --biologically a
man, but Frederick Douglass
was age 15.
And Covey was very
embarrassed at not
being able to sort of
get the better of him.
And it was-- as
I was mentioning,
it was an inner
revolution for Douglass.
Because for the first
time, he had stood up
with a sense of selfhood.
And he knew that as he
was, at that moment,
spiritually emancipated,
at some point,
he would be physically
emancipated.
>>REGINA: But didn't
Covey back off after that?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: He left him alone?
>>HOROWITZ: He backed off.
It was an extraordinary episode.
You know, as soon as Douglass
had asserted his selfhood,
Covey was completely
disoriented.
He didn't know how
to deal with him.
So there's a quality
to the episode--
and Douglass writes
this himself.
There's a quality that is
so outside the ordinary.
There's a spiritual
quality to it.
>>REGINA: He did ultimately
become a freed man, right?
And he went on to become a
huge voice in the abolitionist
movement.
>>HOROWITZ: He was the
conscience, and the intellect,
and the voice of abolition--
>>REGINA: A brilliant man.
>>HOROWITZ: --in
America, a brilliant man,
absolutely formative
to our history--
formative to our history.
And again, you know, we think
of the occult or the paranormal
as being something that
belongs to the fringes
of American culture.
It's part of the roots
You find its intersection in
the lives of so many figures
whose names are
household names today.
>>REGINA: Now we go to the
poor man's psychologist.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about him.
>>HOROWITZ: Professor
Black Herman.
>>REGINA: Black Herman.
>>HOROWITZ: Black
Herman was a magician
named Benjamin Rucker who
lived and worked in Harlem
during what was called the
Harlem Renaissance of writing,
and culture, and the
arts, and jazz in New York
City in the 1920s, '30s.
And he took the stage
name of Black Herman.
And he was an unusual
figure, because he
was one of the few stage
magicians who also designated
himself as an occultist.
And he was a
practitioner of Hoodoo.
>>REGINA: Because usually, they
try to keep those two separate.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
Nowadays the stage
magician considers
himself a practitioner--
>>REGINA: A great technician.
>>HOROWITZ: --of a craft,
a technician, a performer,
and wouldn't, in any way,
want it to be associated with
a belief system, much less the
occult. But Benjamin Rucker,
who called himself Black
Herman, Professor Black Herman--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOROWITZ: --was a
Hoodoo practitioner who
would see people and give
them roots, and formulas,
and give them
advice, advise them
on candle burning
and devotional acts,
and he was also a
stage performer.
There is an
anti-fortunetelling law
on the books in New York state
and in other states as well.
And Black Herman
was set up as kind
of part of a sting
operation in the late 1920s
and was arrested under
this law for a very--
what would have been
considered, even
by the strictures of this
law, a very-- minor offense.
And a reporter from
"The Village Voice"
called me recently
and was wondering--
I think, quite astutely--
whether there was a
racial aspect to this,
whether this law was
being used to take down
a popular figure in
the Harlem Renaissance.
>>REGINA: A fair question.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
And he would play to
integrated audiences.
He was popular as a
magician, but he was also
a practicing occultist.
And so this law, which really
was supposed to protect people
against con artistry,
against people
who were charging ruinous
sums and promising things
that could never be delivered--
Black Herman didn't
charge ruinous sums.
As you alluded, he was known
as the poor man's psychology.
You know, I mean, he would
see people for pennies.
His clientele was a poor
clientele in many respects.
And the only reason he was
targeted under this law,
I think, was probably because
of some sort of racial animus.
It was a sting operation to take
down a popular cultural figure.
>>REGINA: Right.
And that moves us
on to Marcus Garvey,
kind of the first
African pride leader.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
Marcus Garvey, again, just
an extraordinary figure.
He was a pioneering
black nationalist
he was a pioneering voice for
black dignity, liberation,
emancipation.
He was popular in the
United States and Europe
in the early decades
of the 20th century.
Now, Garvey was deeply
attached to and interested
in the philosophy
of New Thought,
or, again, what we,
today, might call
law of attraction, the secret,
the power of positive thinking.
And again, this is one of these
cases where occult history is
hidden in plain sight.
It's hidden in plain sight.
Marcus Garvey's speeches
are filled with phraseology
from New Thought, like
"as a man thinketh,
so shall he should
be-- so shall he be."
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOROWITZ: "Day by day,
in every way, the black man
is getting stronger
and stronger."
You know, he would use all
these phrases from New Thought
tradition, but
reappropriate themself
to the struggle for
black emancipation
in the 20th century.
>>REGINA: Did he have
a strong following?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, he
had a huge following.
I mean, he could address
literally tens of thousands
of people at street rallies.
And he was a very
popular figure.
And he had numerous newspapers,
and businesses, and so forth.
He too was brought down in a
very, very questionable sting
operation.
Now, people think
of Marcus Garvey
as being this ardently political
figure, as being an activist.
He was also a spiritual figure.
And he would tell
people at rallies,
what you've got to
do is use your mind,
use your thoughts
in a scientific way.
Through your thoughts, you can
uplift your station in life.
He would use the
term "science"--
science.
And what many observers--
many white observers-- didn't
understand is, where
he grew up in Jamaica,
and in the Caribbean
in general, science
was sometimes a term that
was used for the occult.
Science was a slang
term for the occult.
>>REGINA: I see.
>>HOROWITZ: And so
when Garvey would say,
you've got to make
a use of science,
you've got to use
your mind in a way
that you can uplift your
life, uplift your finances,
people might wonder, well,
what does he mean, science.
>>REGINA: It was more kind of
the magical elements of life.
>>HOROWITZ: Precisely.
And he was an ardent
believer in this.
And again and again-- and I
walk through this in "Occult
America"-- you'll
find the telltale--
the phraseology, the
slogans, the ideas
of the New Thought movement.
He would quote people from
the New Thought movement,
including Elbert Hubbard,
who was sort of a New Thought
hero in the early 20th century.
And he would include bits
of New Thought aphorisms,
and poetry, and
maxims always in his--
>>REGINA: To make it a--
>>HOROWITZ: --lectures
and articles.
>>REGINA: --cultural message.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
That's right.
He firmly believed,
as many of the figures
did who we're talking
about, that you could marry
social progress to
the inner search,
and that, in fact, the
two had to be married.
>>REGINA: And then, the
beginning of the understanding
of-- or the introduction of--
Islam back to the
African-American population
with Noble Drew Ali.
>>HOROWITZ: Noble Drew Ali-- a
form of Islam-- a form, yeah.
>>REGINA: A form of Islam.
>>HOROWITZ: Noble Drew Ali was
sort of an independent, almost
renegade Freemasonic figure.
He didn't belong to
any traditional lodge
or organization.
But he adapted kind of the
chivalry, and the aesthetic,
and the images of Freemasonry,
and, as you were alluding,
aspects of Islam
such as the fez,
and other cultural stylings,
and aesthetics that the public
associated with Islam.
And he preached an
independent faith which
he called Moorish Science--
Moorish Science.
And Moorish Science
was basically
a New Thought occult
faith that used aspects
of religious universality.
He taught that all
religions were equal.
All religions, as
Madame Blavatsky--
>>REGINA: Madame
Blavatsky, right.
>>HOROWITZ: --taught, all came
from this primeval theology
that modern people
had forgotten about,
and that if you
study any religion,
and you understand how
to decode that religion,
you'll come in contact with
this primeval theology.
Now, Noble Drew Ali had
a supposedly secret book
that he would sell or give
to his followers, which was
called the "Circle 7 Koran"--
the "Circle 7 Koran."
What the "Circle 7
Koran" was, in actuality,
was kind of a rearticulation
of a book called "The Aquarian
Gospel of Jesus
the Christ," which
was written by a man
named Levi Dowling in Los
Angeles in the early
20th century, who
said that he had
basically channeled
a new gospel of Christ.
And the essential
message of that book,
which is at the heart of New Age
spirituality, is Universalism--
Universalism, the idea
that all faiths converge.
So that was what
was in the "Circle 7
Koran," which, for many, many
years, was a secret book.
But that was its message.
And "The Aquarian Gospel
of Jesus the Christ"
was the text that
it was based upon.
>>REGINA: And how did all this
somehow hark back to Akhenaten?
There was a connection
between his work--
or am I mistaken?
Did I read that incorrectly?
>>HOROWITZ: Harken back to what?
>>REGINA: Akhenaten, in
the Egyptian dynasties.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, right, yes.
Well, these men, many
of them thought--
and certainly, Noble
Drew Ali believed--
that they were dealing
with retentions
of authentic
Egyptian philosophy.
And to some extent,
that was true in so far
as you have Hermetic
ideas that came back
into Western circulation
during the Renaissance.
Hermetic ideas were a marriage
of Greek oral tradition and--
I'm sorry, Egyptian
oral tradition--
and Greek literary
writing tradition.
And they did retain some
ancient Egyptian oral tradition.
They did inform the
occult flowering that went
on in Europe during
the Renaissance,
that travelled to America.
So ideas that you'll
find within New Thought,
within texts like "The Aquarian
Gospel," within certain aspects
of Freemasonic
thought, these things
are echoes of Hermeticism,
which are echoes
of ancient Egyptian philosophy.
So I've often said that there
is a very tender thread that's
frayed and broken at some points
that, nonetheless, attaches
the contemporary mystical
alternative spiritual culture
to ancient Egypt.
It's not fantasy.
It's a very thin thread.
It's been frayed.
It's been interrupted.
But it is there.
>>REGINA: And that brings
us to Manly P. Hall.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: Finally, we start.
Because--
>>HOROWITZ: One of my heroes.
>>REGINA: Yes, I know.
And again, also had
deep Hermetic knowledge.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: And the
Hermeticists, even of today,
essentially date back--
the knowledge strands
date back to the 18th dynasty of
Egypt, but also prior to that.
And once you go
deeper into it, it all
dates back to Atlantis and
the cosmology before Atlantis.
And Manly P. Hall
was a student of all
of this, and a great mind.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
And it really comprises
this primeval theology--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HOROWITZ: --that
Madame Blavatsky
said ran through our lives
like an underground river.
And all of our religious
ideas, our esoteric ideas,
our spiritual techniques can
ultimately be traced back
to this primeval theology.
And that was certainly
Manly Hall's belief.
And he enshrined this
principle in a book
that he published at
just the age of 27
in the year 1928 called "The
Secret Teachings of All Ages."
>>REGINA: It's a beautiful book.
>>HOROWITZ: It's one of the
seminal books of my life--
>>REGINA: Absolutely--
>>HOROWITZ: --one of the--
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>HOROWITZ: --seminal
books of my life.
It's almost impossible
to summarize
the extraordinary
nature of this book--
>>REGINA: It is.
>>HOROWITZ: --and
the circumstances--
>>REGINA: It's so alive.
It's so richly-illustrated.
It's beautiful.
>>HOROWITZ: It's extraordinary.
It's so vast.
It's so epic.
It's so varied and
diverse in its ideas,
you know, ranging
from the mystery
symbols of ancient Egypt,
to Pythagorean mathematics,
to the myths that
the Native Americans.
>>REGINA: Kind of
classically Hermetic.
>>HOROWITZ: Classically
Hermetic and vast in its scale.
To call it a landscape
doesn't do it justice.
It's almost like a sun,
you know, around which--
>>REGINA: He was on a mission.
>>HOROWITZ: --so
much is circulating.
>>REGINA: He was going
to save the ancient--
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
>>REGINA: --esoteric teachings.
And what an unlikely
birth he had
for somebody who became
the savior of esotericism
in a certain sense.
He was born in rural
Canada in 1901,
had no particular schooling.
His parents divorced
just before he was born.
His mother was an
interesting woman.
She was a chiropractor, an
early female chiropractor.
She played violin.
And I have an early
picture of her.
She's wearing a
wristwatch, you know, much
like the contemporary
wristwatches we wear today,
in this kind of
late-Victorian dress.
And it wasn't something--
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>HOROWITZ: --you saw among--
>>REGINA: You don't
see that, yeah.
>>HOROWITZ: --many women.
Yeah.
She was an interesting figure.
But since Manly's
parents divorced,
he was actually
taken into the care
of one of his grandmothers,
who raised him
in Canada and in
the American West.
He had very little
conventional schooling.
They sort of bopped around
in the American West
where they had relatives.
And finally, when
Manley was 15 years old,
she sent him to New
York City to be enrolled
in a military academy,
feeling that he
needed some formal education.
And from that point on, he
was pretty much on his own.
He left the military academy
after a couple of years,
and he got a job as a clerk
at a Wall Street banking firm.
And still a very
self-educated young man.
But it was just at
the time when some
of the great public libraries
were opening to public use,
including the New
York Public Library.
And he would read over
volume after volume
of esoteric literature as it
was available at that time.
And he had a spark of
brilliance about him,
a self-educated
capacity, probably
something that we might
call a photographic memory.
He had this gift for retaining,
and proportionalizing,
and cataloging huge
amounts of information.
And in the 1920s, as
he entered his 20s,
he grew fearful that
the age of banking,
and jazz, and rum-running
was going to spell
the end of the esoteric wisdom.
>>REGINA: He did not
believe that greed
had a place in the
development of life.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
That's right.
And he also looked upon
academia with despair,
because he saw that the study of
primeval religions in academia
often treated these religions
as just ancient systems
of superstition that
could hold nothing
for the contemporary person,
for the serious person
in the 1920s.
So he made it his
mission that he
was going to catalog and save
all this esoteric wisdom,
from the mystery schools
of ancient Greece,
to the meanings of
the Egyptian pyramids,
to the doctrines of
the Rosicrucians,
the Freemasons, the
Illuminati, the hidden meaning
of the tarot, the esotericism
of the Shakespearean dramas.
There's almost no
subject that you
can mention that doesn't find a
place in "The Secret Teachings
of all Ages."
And he began his mission sitting
at one of the huge oak tables
in the New York Public Library.
And he would walk
in every day and ask
for books that were
always available,
because nobody else was
asking to look for them.
And he began to attract
some benefactors.
He started to travel.
He got money from
various benefactors
to travel to India, to Japan,
back to the West coast.
There was some self-styled
Rosicrucian groups
that he fell into.
He later questioned
their authenticity.
He questioned their antiquity.
And he kind of moved
away from them.
And he began to develop
this idea for what
he called the great
book, which we now
call "The Secret
Teachings of all Ages."
He published this vast book--
I mean, its dimensions are
the size of a small table--
when he was age 27--
27.
>>REGINA: The dedication
and pure obsession
it took to do that by that age.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
If you were to
look at that book,
you would say it would be the
product of a worthy lifetime
or several worthy lifetimes.
>>REGINA: Yes, exactly.
>>HOROWITZ: 27 years old.
And I tell you, I republished
an edition of that book
called the reader's
edition in 2003,
which is an unabridged
resetting of the text
so you can read it as one
simple, standard-sized book.
It stands up with just
extraordinary power.
To call the work prodigious
is an understatement.
There was something beyond
the ordinary about this.
There was simply something
beyond the ordinary.
At the age of 27, to
encapsulated this much wisdom--
and I speak only of the text.
I mean, the illustrations
and the charts--
and you know, you open
the original book up,
it looks like a page
of Babylonian Talmud.
>>REGINA: It does.
>>HOROWITZ: There's
so much happening.
And that he accomplished
this at the age of 27
with resources
that were available
not only in a pre-digital
era, but in an era
where libraries
were limited-- you
couldn't just walk into
Columbia University
and ask for this or that.
You know, it was very
difficult to lay your hands
on some of these things, or
some of these translations.
He was extraordinary, he was.
>>REGINA: And he had a great
admiration for Francis Bacon.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes
>>REGINA: And like Bacon--
as with Bacon, he also
believed Shakespeare--
that Bacon was the--
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
>>REGINA: --author of the
works of "Shakespeare."
>>HOROWITZ: Right.
>>REGINA: He also-- let's
get into the popular portion
of his life.
He was also a
friend of Burl Ives.
And let's talk about
that a little bit.
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
it was interesting.
You know, Hall lived most
of his life in Los Angeles.
Although it's funny, he didn't
hobnob with many celebrities.
I mean, god love Burl
Ives, but you know,
it wasn't like you were
hanging around with Cary Grant,
you know?
I mean, it was-- he had a
modest circle of friends.
His friends included Burl Ives.
They included Bela Lugosi,
who was a great fan of opera.
They would listen
to opera together.
He only got involved
very tangentially
with the movie business.
He didn't tend to
glom onto celebrities.
>>REGINA: But weren't
they Freemasons too?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh yes,
yes, they were indeed.
And Manly became a
Freemason in the 1950s.
Now, he wrote about Masonry
when he was younger.
And a lot of people thought
Manly was a Freemason
all his life, or the Freemasons
had funded him, or some such.
You know, Manly was not a
Freemason until the 1950s,
until he was well
into middle age.
I'm not a--
>>REGINA: What is it
that-- go ahead, sorry.
>>HOROWITZ: I'm not a Freemason.
You know, I talk about
Masonry a great deal.
And people sometimes
think I'm a Freemason.
I go to Freemasonic events.
I have no aversion whatsoever
to joining Freemasonry,
but I've always been a
kind of independent person.
So I'm not a Freemason myself.
>>REGINA: Right, but what
drove him that direction?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, he
had friendships.
And he came to feel that within
Masonic rites and rituals,
there existed a retention
of certain, at least,
remnants and threads of
ancient Hebraic rituals
and initiatory customs,
mystery school customs.
So he came to feel it was a
furtherance of his education.
>>REGINA: You know,
and the thing about him
is, like with a lot
of these characters,
there is a certain
type of naivete to him.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: He was
steeped in the thing
that he was passionate for.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
>>REGINA: And
ultimately, he got--
let's talk about
his private life--
taken in by shadowy forces.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
That is such a wonderful point.
And the word you chose, that
there was this naivete, that
is the perfect word.
Because Manly was
really a scholar.
And he didn't tend to
glom onto powerful people.
He didn't hobnob with
very many celebrities
or get involved with
the movie business,
even though it was
there all around him
in Hollywood, where his
headquarters, the Philosophical
Research Society, still stands
today in the Griffith Park
neighborhood.
He was read by Elvis Presley,
who was a big fan of his.
He could have had all
kinds of friendships.
And you would imagine
today, in the 21st century--
>>REGINA: You'd exploit
them all on Instagram.
>>HOROWITZ: Precisely.
Precisely.
But Manly was cut from
a different cloth.
It was a good cloth.
And it was a cloth of
character and decency.
And there was a naivete.
And towards the end of his
life in the late 1980s,
he was taken advantage of
by a couple of characters
who told him that they
could broadcast and sell
his material all over
the world, and put it out
through satellite television,
and so forth and so on.
And manly, toward
the end of his life,
was worried about whether his
legacy would be preserved.
And he signed his will,
and his belongings,
and his collection
of antiquities
over to these figures.
And it resulted in a mass of
legal battles after his death.
>>REGINA: Well, he signed it
six days before his death.
>>HOROWITZ: Six days
before his death.
>>REGINA: He signed it over.
>>HOROWITZ: And there
was some suspicion
that his death was a homicide.
And it was, in fact, being
investigated as a homicide
by the LAPD.
Now, that file has
since been closed.
But for several years,
his death was open,
and it was under
investigation, and there were
some suspicious circumstances.
Now, I do not ultimately
believe that Manly was murdered.
But there's no
question that he was--
>>REGINA: He was hoodwinked.
>>HOROWITZ: --taken
advantage of.
He was hoodwinked
at the very least.
And the signing
over of his will--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HOROWITZ: --to one of these
con artists six days before his
death, it doesn't pass--
as one judge put it, it doesn't
pass any reasonable person's
sniff test.
He was taken advantage
of, and he was defrauded.
And there were
lawsuits that went
on between his family, and these
guys, and the Philosophical
Research Society
after his death.
It just gutted the
place financially.
There were millions of
dollars in legal bills.
Part of Manly's collection of
esoteric books, objects, stamps
had to be sold off to the
Getty Museum in Los Angeles
to pay legal bills.
It was just an absolute shame.
But the irony is--
the irony is this--
Manly was worried, toward
the end of his life,
that his legacy would be lost.
I've republished this edition
of "The Secret Teachings
of All Ages" in 2003.
At this point, gosh, I mean,
it's sold over 100,000 copies.
There's more people reading "The
Secret Teachings of All Ages"
today than during
Manly's lifetime.
>>REGINA: Are you going to
do that coffee table version?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
that's still being done.
>>REGINA: Yeah, not the book--
>>HOROWITZ: My friends at PRS--
>>REGINA: --the coffee table.
>>HOROWITZ: --with
whom I work frequently,
are still doing that edition.
So you can get that
coffee table addition.
You can get the
reader's edition.
There's other of
Manly's books out there.
The fact is his readership
is broader today than it
was during his lifetime.
And, as I've written
about in "The Washington
Post" and elsewhere, he had
one very influential fan,
an actor named Ronald Reagan,
who went on to big things.
I found that in
Reagan's speeches,
starting in the 1950s up
through the first term
of his presidency, he was
quoting from and using stories
from a book that
Manley wrote in 1944
called "The Secret
Destiny of America."
Now, can you imagine Reagan, as
an actor who is transitioning
to a political career, finds
this book, which was not
a book that was easy
to find in the 1940s,
is so taken with it that
he starts to quote from it
and adopt phrasing
and ideas from it
in his speeches in the 1950s?
>>REGINA: It became
part of his ideology.
>>HOROWITZ: Became
And it was the same ideology
that Madame Blavatsky
said motivated her to
come to America, which
was this notion that
America was, so to speak,
a holy grail among nations
that had some sort of a mission
to fulfill an ancient experiment
in self-governance and
religious liberty
that Manly felt
was launched, in its earliest
beginnings, in primeval Egypt.
And Madame Blavatsky
was sent to America
because she said she
was on this mission
to sort of fulfill
America's "secret destiny,"
as Manly put it.
And you can find
some of the phrasing
that Manly used in
Reagan's own speeches.
I wrote about it in my
book "One Simple Idea."
I write about it in "Salon,"
"The Washington Post."
The phrasing is there.
You just need to
know to look for it.
You need to understand--
>>REGINA: Absolutely
fascinating.
>>HOROWITZ: --the way in.
>>REGINA: Now,
anybody that wants
to pick up a copy
of the reader's
edition of "The Secret
Teaching of All Times,"
you can get it through
Amazon or anywhere?
>>HOROWITZ: Amazon or
anywhere you buy books--
"The Secret Teachings of
All Ages" reader's edition,
I personally put
that book together.
The text is unabridged.
The illustrations are abridged.
But I made a decision that
every illustration that
was necessary to
the understanding
and deciphering of the text--
>>REGINA: Is in there.
>>HOROWITZ: --would be kept.
So it really is a very
complete experience.
>>REGINA: Very good.
OK, now we're going to, in
a way, go back to Blavatsky.
She always figures large--
>>HOROWITZ: She's
always with us.
>>REGINA: She was everywhere,
you know-- and Truman Capote.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely wild.
This is a story that, you know,
you literally cannot make these
things up.
It's so strange that the
lives of these figures
would converge,
sometimes posthumously,
that it's hard to believe.
After the assassination
of Bobby Kennedy,
Truman Capote was on Johnny
Carson's "Tonight Show"
in 1968.
And this was a few years
after Truman Capote had
published his great work
of true crime nonfiction,
"In Cold Blood."
And he was considered an
expert on criminology.
He was considered
an expert on crime.
So he was often asked questions
about crime, and mass murders,
and so forth.
So Truman Capote is on with
Johnny Carson in New York City
on "The Tonight Show" in 1968.
And he puts out this
theory on the air,
completely self-generated, that
Madame Blavatsky's great occult
encyclopedia, "The
Secret Doctrine," which
she had published shortly
before her death in 1888,
had within it a
manual for revolution,
a manual for overthrowing
governments that involved
the assassination of key figures
in society to destabilize
the society.
And Capote put out the
theory that this manual
for revolution,
this occult manual,
was being used by revolutionary
esoteric guerrillas who
were trying to de--
>>REGINA: Is that the nature?
Is there such a doctrine?
>>HOROWITZ: Nothing whatsoever.
>>REGINA: I never read that.
>>HOROWITZ: You
can comb that book,
which is not easy to read--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOROWITZ: --from
beginning to end-- it's
two complete volumes.
You will find nothing whatsoever
about political violence.
>>REGINA: So what was his
motivation for essentially
making that up--
>>HOROWITZ: I have--
>>REGINA: --out of whole cloth?
>>HOROWITZ: I can only
imagine that Capote picked it
up from rumors, things
that he had heard,
something that he had picked
up, and just sheer imagination--
just sheer imagination.
So he makes the case-- and
this gets reported on in "Time"
magazine of all places--
that the assassinations of
Martin Luther King, Malcolm X,
and Bobby Kennedy were a leaf
taken from Madame Blavatsky's
"Secret doctrine" as a
manual for revolution,
as a way to destabilize a
society by assassinating
key figures.
So the right-wing
John Birch Society
picks up on Truman
Capote's theory.
And as I point out
in the book, this
must be the one and only
time that this chic New York
writer had some
kind of common cause
with the John Birch Society.
And they start taking out
advertisements in newspapers
in California and
elsewhere saying
that America is
being destabilized
by this occult
Russian philosophy
promulgated by this occultist,
you know, who, at that point,
had been dead for
almost a century.
Madame Blavatsky never
stops being remade
in people's imaginations.
And one of the
things that Capote
pointed to as evidence for his
theory was that Sirhan Sirhan--
>>REGINA: Right, that's where
I was going to go next, yeah.
>>HOROWITZ: --the assassin
of Bobby Kennedy, when
he was in jail, had requested
copies of her books,
including "The Secret Doctrine."
Now, the fact is, Sirhan
Sirhan did request
certain philosophical
books, including
books that were composed
of lectures that were
given by a young Krishnamurti.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HOROWITZ: He was also
a member of the Order
of the Rosicrucians--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOROWITZ: --who later dropped
him from their membership rolls
because he didn't pay some
sort of a $2 book-borrowing fee
before he turned to
a life of homicide.
The fact is, you can
take these puzzle pieces,
and you can throw
them onto the table
and say, look, I
think I see this.
I think I see that.
And that's what
Capote was doing.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>HOROWITZ: There
was no such call
to political violence in
Blavatsky's work, none
whatsoever.
>>REGINA: Right,
I didn't think so.
And Sirhan Sirhan,
I mean, it just--
that still seems like such
a conflicted and sad story.
When you listen to the existing
interrogation of him that still
exists, in his language,
and word, and demeanor,
something doesn't line up--
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --with the
person that supposedly
became this assassin.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
Yeah.
That was one of Capote's
pieces of evidence.
He felt-- or you know, he sort
of imagined that Sirhan was one
of--
>>REGINA: So he had
a bone to pick--
>>HOROWITZ: --Blavatsky's--
>>REGINA: --with this
occultist movement?
>>HOROWITZ: --agents.
Yeah, and I think he thought
it made a good story to tell
late-night to Johnny Carson.
And it got picked up in
"Time" magazine and elsewhere.
It was complete fantasy.
I go through the whole
thing in "Occult America."
But it's amazing how every
generation sort of recreates
Blavatsky in their own image.
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
>>HOROWITZ: Do they
see her as a threat?
Do they see her as a savior?
>>REGINA: Well, mostly,
in more recent times,
she's more vilified.
>>HOROWITZ: She's very
often vilified, even today.
My friend Gary
Lachman, the historian,
wrote a very good biography
of Madame Blavatsky.
It was reviewed in "Harper's"
and the "Paris Review."
And "Harper's" wrote this
long, protracted review
sort of attacking
Blavatsky's memory.
And I thought to myself,
why, in the 21st century,
is this woman such
a source of vitriol?
Why does she--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HOROWITZ: --such
a threat to people?
But every generation
sort of sees her
as a kind of Rorschach.
>>REGINA: Very true.
Now we'll move on to FDR
and Henry A. Wallace.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: I love the
story of Henry A. Wallace.
>>HOROWITZ: Henry Wallace
is a really lost chapter
in occult history, even
though, again, the facts
can present themselves
if one just peels back
the onion a little bit.
Wallace was a Republican who was
named secretary of agriculture
by FDR.
And after a period of time, he
became FDR's vice president.
He was FDR's second
vice president.
And he was later replaced by
the man who history remembers,
Harry Truman.
And so Wallace was a Freemason.
FDR was as well.
And they both had a taste for
portentous, dramatic imagery.
And Henry Wallace, one
day, came across the fact
that the reverse of the
Great Seal of America,
which is the familiar eagle
holding the olive branches
and arrows and its claws, is the
alluring eye and pyramid that
appears on the back of
our dollar bill surrounded
by the Latin slogan
"Annuit Coeptis Novus Ordo
Seclorum," which,
roughly translated,
means "God smiles on our
new order of the ages."
And he thought that
this image, in addition
to being alluring
and magical, was
sort of a call to return
America to its earliest ideals.
And Wallace felt it
could summon people
to a sense of higher morale
and purpose during the Great
Depression.
Now, people have these negative
or conspiratorial associations
with the phrase "new
order of the ages."
The Founding Fathers,
enshrining that
on the reverse of
our Great Seal,
were really identifying
the nation--
>>REGINA: More in
Francis Bacon's meaning--
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: --of it.
>>HOROWITZ: Exactly.
They saw America, they
saw the early republic
as a chain of
great civilizations
extending back to ancient Egypt,
ancient Greece, ancient Rome.
They saw America as a place
where the individual's
spiritual search could
be protected, where
the search for meaning
was considered sacred,
and something that was legally
enshrined into our founding
documents.
So Wallace thought, what we
need is a new deal of the ages.
We need to renew a sense of
connection to our most august
roots.
So he brings FDR the idea
of maybe minting a coin
or somehow using this
eye and pyramid as part
of our currency.
And FDR does him one
better and decides,
we're going to place
this, actually,
on the back of the dollar bill.
This was only as
recently as 1935.
That's when this image
started to appear.
>>REGINA: We're talking about
the pyramid with the all-seeing
eye--
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah,
the all-seeing eye--
>>REGINA: --capstone?
>>HOROWITZ: --as well as
the more familiar eagle.
And FDR-- you can actually
find these records
in the Department of
Treasury archives,
and they also are
searchable online.
FDR personally
supervised the placement
of the eye and pyramid
and the American eagle
on the back of the dollar bill.
And he reversed
the original order
so that when you're reading,
as we do, from left to right,
you see first-- you encounter
first-- the eye and pyramid.
And gave it the greater
position of primacy.
The two were
originally reversed,
and he penciled in a change.
Because he felt this image
had such portent and meaning
for the nation.
That's how the eye and pyramid
got on the back of our dollar
bill--
two Freemasons, Vice President
Henry Wallace and President
Franklin Roosevelt,
>>REGINA: Well let's talk
about the end of his career.
Because FDR was always forced
in the position of kind
of explaining who Henry Wallace
was, what he was really about.
And let's talk about
what happened to him.
>>HOROWITZ: Wallace was, for
a period of time, a disciple
to a Theosophist and artist
named Nicholas Roerich, who
was a brilliant man and also
a very controversial man, who
had all these
different machinations
and plans going on
that, sometimes,
his own benefactors didn't
understand and didn't know
about.
And there was a period
of several years
where Wallace had learned
things from him, exchanged sort
of adoring letters with him.
He gave Wallace his own
initiatory name of Galahad.
And they would-- and
he wrote these letters
to Nicholas Roerich
addressing him as "Dear Guru."
At the time, Americans didn't
know what the term "guru" was.
You know, it all
sounded very exotic.
>>REGINA: You didn't want it
coming from your vice president
though.
>>HOROWITZ: Right.
And these letters were
eventually-- right.
These letters were eventually
leaked to the press.
And they caused--
in the long run,
they caused Wallace
tremendous embarrassment.
And he ran an independent
campaign for the presidency
in 1948.
And it was thought
that Wallace could
become a really
significant third force
in American politics.
His party was called
the Progressive Party.
But a variety of
things happened.
The letters he wrote to Roerich,
which had been leaked earlier,
resurfaced.
And it was very
embarrassing to him.
And eventually, it ended
his political career.
And he lived out the rest
of his life very quietly.
Died in the early 1960s
on a farm in Westchester
County in New York.
>>REGINA: But FDR said--
and it was on record.
He said, he's a philosopher.
He's got ideas.
He thinks right.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
>>REGINA: He'll
help people think.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
He said that--
>>REGINA: And that's
what's lacking,
and always has been lacking,
with maybe a couple exceptions,
in our leadership--
>>HOROWITZ: That's
right, and it's--
>>REGINA: --someone
who knows how to think.
>>HOROWITZ: --perfectly put.
Right.
He said he-- he was told
by political advisors,
you know, this guy's a mystic.
He's weird.
He's an occultist.
He's a Theosophist-- and
he was a Theosophist--
you can't put him on
the presidential ticket.
And he said just that, he's
not a mystic, he's a thinker.
He's a digger.
He knows how to think.
He'll help the people think.
Can you imagine an executive
saying that today, he'll
help the people think?
>>REGINA: No, no, nope,
can't imagine that.
>>HOROWITZ: So he was
a remarkable figure.
And you know, I use terms like
"occultist" with veneration.
I use terms like "New
Age" with veneration.
These are terms I
would apply to myself.
I don't use terms to
describe another person
that I wouldn't be willing to be
called or labeled with myself.
So when I say Henry
Wallace was an occultist,
that's an accurate statement.
He was deeply interested
in the esoteric.
>>REGINA: It simply means
the study of the hidden.
>>HOROWITZ: The
hidden, precisely.
>>REGINA: That's it.
>>HOROWITZ: And he
was a Theosophist,
and he was interested
in astrology.
He was interested in
Tibetan Buddhism at a time
when most Americans
had not heard of it.
He was a great
political adventurer,
a great spiritual adventurer.
And he had difficulty--
you mentioned
Manly P. Hall being naive.
There was a streak
of that in Wallace.
He couldn't understand
that other people would not
take his search as
seriously as he did.
>>REGINA: Right, because
it was ultimately
for truth, higher truths.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK, I
know we were talking
about politics and occultism.
And you write about
Hitler in this book.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes
>>REGINA: And you
say the fascination--
or in the conspiracy
community in particular--
that Hitler was an
occultist, you say, mm-mm.
You don't believe
he was an occultist?
>>HOROWITZ: No, he wasn't.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HOROWITZ: What he was
was an ultimate cynic who
was willing to adopt
symbols and insignias
from occult organizations
and occult tradition, use
them, and then discard the
people and the movements
behind them as brutally
and as quickly as possible.
>>REGINA: Didn't you say--
I mean, in your
book, I think you
said the members of secret
lodges in his country
were murdered.
>>HOROWITZ: They were murdered.
They were murdered.
>>REGINA: He was not--
he did not support
occult activity.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
There was a man named Karl
Ernst Krafft who was rumored
to be Hitler's astrologer.
He died in a concentration camp.
There was a man
Karl Germer who was
an associate of the occultist
Aleister Crowley's who
was also sent to a concentration
camp on charges of Freemasonry.
Freemasons,
astrologers, psychics,
mediums, they were
often rounded up
and murdered like any other
undesirables in Nazi Germany.
It's very important to
remember that history.
Now--
>>REGINA: Because they're trying
to tie fascism to occultism.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
And the idea of any
countervailing philosophy
in Nazi Germany was considered
an act of subversion.
If you were practicing
astrology, or Buddhism,
or any kind of psychical
art, the very presence
of any kind of allegiance
outside of that to the fuhrer
was considered subversive.
I'm not making a comparison, but
the same thing is true in China
today.
My book "One Simple Idea,"
which is a history and analysis
of New Thought, was published
in China and censored.
Because I wrote about
New Thought's popularity
among various political figures,
including Ronald Reagan,
including Henry Wallace.
>>REGINA: Right.
I see.
>>HOROWITZ: And the
Chinese government
likewise perceives
any counter philosophy
to what's promulgated
by its central party
as being potentially subversive.
In Nazi Germany,
of course, this was
taken to the ultimate and
most nightmarish degree.
Now, it is true--
it is true-- there were
some members of Hitler's
inner circle, such as
Himmler and others,
who had occult interests.
That is a fact.
But Hitler himself had very
little patience for this.
He was interested in the
mythology of the Wagnerian
operas.
He would scold people
and push people away
if they tried to talk
about occult theory to him.
>>REGINA: He was interested
in social agendas
and that sort of thing as well.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
He was all too willing to take
an image like the swastika,
was an ancient Vedic
symbol that the Nazis--
or the proto-Nazis--
probably first encountered
in Blavatsky's
"Secret Doctrine,"
use it as a unifying
symbol, as an electrifying,
magnetic symbol--
and it is magnetic, as many
such ancient symbols are--
and discard the people and
the organizations behind it--
not only discard
them, but murder them
if they were at hand.
>>REGINA: So who was
his primary influence
to at least adopt some of that?
>>HOROWITZ: You know,
there were early members
of the Nazi party, many of whom
were killed when the SA was
suppressed, who had interests
in occult philosophy,
as did many figures in Germany.
>>REGINA: So he took the
power symbols, power--
little one-liners,
philosophy [INAUDIBLE],,
and then simply pasted
it over the movement.
>>HOROWITZ: He would
cut them out, paste it
over the movement,
discard or kill
the figures, or organizations,
or publishing houses
from which those things came.
These were acts of ultimate
cynicism, not occultism,
as pertaining to Hitler.
>>REGINA: OK, we have another
European, Rudolf Steiner, who
I have very great respect for.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, of course.
>>REGINA: And he
enters into this story
and figures fairly
largely, even though he's
lesser-known than a
lot of these people.
Let's talk about--
and I'm a fan.
And because of that, I sent my
son through the Waldorf school
system--
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, how wonderful.
How wonderful.
>>REGINA: --his whole life.
Yeah.
>>HOROWITZ: Now, speaking
of occultism and Nazism,
Steiner is a perfect
example of somebody
with deep democratic impulses,
deep humanitarian impulses
who was steeped in occultism
during the period of time
in which the Nazis
were making their rise.
He was hated by the early Nazis.
He was a scourge
to the early Nazis.
People have to
understand that Europe,
in the early 20th
century, was a hothouse
of different political
and spiritual ideologies.
Democracy, fascism, socialism,
communism, occultism,
various forms of Eastern
and mystical spirituality,
these things all mixed together.
And people of
different backgrounds
and political persuasions would
adopt or immerse themselves
in these things from
different angles--
>>REGINA: Combined with--
>>HOROWITZ: --in different ways.
>>REGINA: --hard
times economically.
>>HOROWITZ: Combined with
hard times economically--
>>REGINA: Right, which--
>>HOROWITZ: --and various--
>>REGINA: --does feed into this.
>>HOROWITZ: --social
crises, absolutely.
There was no innate affinity
between fascism and the occult.
And I walk through that very
carefully in "Occult America."
Because that's an
idea that blinds us
to our own history
in a certain sense.
And Rudolph Steiner is
a perfect case in point.
Here was a mystic, a scholar,
an esoteric figure of the finest
quality, with deep democratic
and humanitarian impulses,
who was steeped in the occult,
and who the early Nazis
hated and saw as a threat.
Now, one of Steiner's really
wonderful, wonderful legacies
in this country, in addition
to the Waldorf schools,
are Camphill Villages, which
are living-learning communities
for mentally-challenged adults.
One of these villages exists
in upstate New York near where
my family has a house.
Steiner was an
extraordinary educator
who understood how to
educate the whole person,
how to cultivate education
physically, mentally,
emotionally.
He was one of the greatest--
>>REGINA: Everything--
Anthroposophical agriculture,
medicine, all of it.
>>HOROWITZ: He foresaw
organic farming
through what he called
biodynamic farming.
He was one of the greatest
humanitarians and educators
of the 20th century, wholly
steeped in the occult.
And got his start,
as a young man,
in Madame Blavatsky's
Theosophical Society.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And so at least that
continues on today
and grows as more schools
around the country,
and America in particular, are
now doing Waldorf-based charter
schools to start
taking these higher
thoughts into the public
school system, which
is really interesting to
see anything of these roots
we've talked about
actually making
its way into the mainstream.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
You know, the Steiner
schools, the Waldorf schools,
are the most popular alternative
form of education in America.
And soon we're going
to stop calling
them alternative, because they
are making tremendous inroads.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
My nephew worked in one
of those adult communities
for two years.
>>HOROWITZ: How remarkable.
>>REGINA: All of our
kids in our family
were raised in the
Waldorf system.
>>HOROWITZ: That's wonderful.
>>REGINA: And it was
just a magnificent--
>>HOROWITZ: Wonderful.
>>REGINA: --experience.
So yeah, I'm just kind of
giving thumbs up on that.
OK, now how do we get from
there to Aleister Crowley?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, wow.
>>REGINA: Because then, we've
got to get to Edgar Cayce,
and we have 15 minutes.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
Well, look, you know,
Aleister Crowley
was an extraordinary figure.
He was a great artist.
I think, in many ways,
he was a great intellect.
In many ways, he was a truly
great explorer into the occult.
He operated without a map.
And he did many,
many things that
were intellectually intrepid.
I think he also was very
ethically-challenged.
He did not have a strong
internal ethical or moral
barometer.
A lot of his students, a
lot of people around him
got hurt, suffered his
abuse, were cast aside
when he no longer needed
them, either financially
or otherwise.
I think he was a figure
who, if I was alive,
I would not have sought
his company or to be
a pupil of his.
Because while I
respect him, I think
he was a person whose
ethics were poorly skewed.
>>REGINA: Well,
and he was directly
trying to marry magic
and sex, for example.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
And look, you know,
there are many aspects
of chaos magic,
ceremonial magic, Thelema,
that I respect tremendously.
>>REGINA: But we're talking
more darkly-intentioned.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: That's the difference.
>>HOROWITZ: The problem
with Crowley's philosophy
as I see it is that it
lent itself to narcissism.
I'm not saying it was
steeped in narcissism,
and I'm not saying that
narcissism was implicit in it.
But he didn't provide the
ethical guardrails in his life,
in his works, or in the
lives of his students,
that would help
them not get sucked
into a kind of
magical narcissism.
I understand that when he
talked of the true self,
he was speaking
of the true self,
perhaps, as Ralph
Waldo Emerson spoke
of it, as the human at his most
exquisite, at his most free.
I understand that.
But a figure like Ralph Waldo
Emerson, unlike Crowley, was
also steeped in gospel ethics.
New Thought is steeped
in gospel ethics.
And I often counsel people
that when you go down
the path of magic, you have
to have a great ethical work
at your back.
Whether it's the Gospels,
or the Bhagavad Gita,
or the Talmud, or
the Tao Te Ching,
you need something that's
going to ground you ethically.
Or you can just
float off to a place
where you don't want to be.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
you just hit it.
>>HOROWITZ: And for me, that's
the flaw in Crowley's work.
>>REGINA: Magic without ethics
is not servicing the planet
and humanity.
>>HOROWITZ: It's a recipe
for great personal danger
and danger to other
people around you.
And that's where I
part ways with Crowley.
>>REGINA: There's so
many other people--
Baird Spalding, Annie
Besant, so many to go into.
But let's get to Edgar
Cayce, because he's--
well, because he's
Edgar Cayce, am I right?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, again, one
of my true personal heroes.
Edgar Cayce grew up as a devout
Christian in rural Kentucky
in the late 19th century
just after the Civil War.
And as a young man he--
like Andrew Jackson Davis,
who we discussed
earlier, he found
that he could go into
these trance states
and receive information about
how to diagnose and prescribe
cures for diseases, often
for people he had never
met who might live
or be asking him
for a reading from a distance
of many, many hundreds of miles
away.
And there are records of
Cayce giving thousands
of these medical readings.
And later, he expanded into past
life readings and other things.
And Cayce developed
a reputation,
in the first half
of the 20th century,
as this extraordinary
medical clairvoyant
who, from these
trance states, could
look into the lives,
the biology, the bodies,
the past recurrences
of people who
came to him for psychological
and physical help
and prescribe cures.
Cayce, in many ways,
was the polar opposite
of Aleister Crowley.
Because he was an occultist
who, in his personal life,
was deeply grounded
in scripture.
He read through the King
James Bible once a year
every year of his adult life.
And he struggled,
as a Christian,
with some of the
material that was
coming through his readings.
His readings talked about
astrology, numerology, karma,
reincarnation.
And he struggled, I
think with a great deal
of intellectual integrity, to
marry these things to scripture
and to the Gospels.
And I go through this
in "Occult America."
I think he made a really
heroic and integral effort
to take some of this
material and demonstrate
how it could jibe
with scripture,
because that was very
personally important to him.
>>REGINA: And yet he was also,
like anybody else, a rather
conflicted human being.
He would say bigoted
things one minute,
do a pristine reading the
next, and then do this--
I don't have it.
It's on page 244 of your book.
There's a beautiful little
rendering on homosexuality,
for example.
>>HOROWITZ: Extraordinary.
He wrote, to a cousin
of his, in the 1930s,
such a sensitive, decent,
reassuring letter.
Because this man
was telling him,
I'm a homosexual, and
using the language
that was used back then.
And here was Cayce, a
guy who had grown up
in the rural Bible Belt.
Where was this coming from?
Where it was this
ability to counsel,
even in a waking
state, coming from?
He was a good man.
He was a conflicted man,
as I am, as many of us are.
There was a realness about him.
And he's one of my true heroes.
>>REGINA: We only have
a couple minutes left,
and I want to find out what
your newest project is.
>>HOROWITZ: OK.
>>REGINA: Some of these
people I mentioned--
you know, we get into
Elizabeth Clare Prophet, Jeane
Dixon, Sydney Omarr, a
whole bunch of people
we couldn't even get
to in the conversation.
Do any one of them
pop out that we just
need to incorporate into
this story, including
Baird Spalding?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, Baird T.
Spalding was a remarkable man.
He wrote a book called
"The Life and Teachings
of the Masters of the Far East,"
which remains popular today.
Baird Spalding basically
took a leaf out
of Madame Blavatsky's Theosophy.
And he told this narrative,
which some people question
the veracity of-- but
it has great beauty--
in which he traveled to and was
tutored by mysterious adepts
from the East.
And as I always
point out to people--
and as I go into in the book--
whether or not Baird
Spalding saw, heard,
or did all the things he
claimed to, what you'll find
is a beautiful theology
coming out of his ideas,
a theology of universality,
a theology of, again,
this kind of primeval
uniting doctrine at the heart
of all great religions.
That is the central New Age
ideal, that religions do not
dissipate, religion's converge.
>>REGINA: Consolidate.
>>HOROWITZ: Right.
And if we really
understand them--
if we really understand them--
rather than get
lost in tribalism,
they bring us closer together.
That was Baird
Spalding's message.
>>REGINA: Interesting man.
They said, if he was a phony,
they called him a "real phony."
>>HOROWITZ: A real phony--
>>REGINA: He was the real deal.
>>HOROWITZ: --that's one
of the phrases I love
and that I use in
"Occult America."
He was a real phony.
He had ideals.
He stood for something.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Lead a-- kind of a humble
ending to his life.
>>HOROWITZ: Very humble
ending-- a poor guy,
didn't profit much
off his books.
>>REGINA: Died in a
hotel room or something?
>>HOROWITZ: Died in
a hotel room, lonely,
a gold prospector.
This was a different age.
These people didn't have social
media platforms and celebrity
friends.
They often lead
very solitary lives.
>>REGINA: They didn't
have Kickstarter.
>>HOROWITZ: They
certainly didn't.
And they lead, in many
cases, very modest lives.
>>REGINA: Yeah, indeed.
And that was true for
almost all of these people
we've spoken of.
>>HOROWITZ: Edgar Cayce as well.
>>REGINA: Edgar Cayce as well.
>>HOROWITZ: He did not
profit to any great extent.
Lead most of his life, adult
life, near the poverty line
actually.
>>REGINA: Right.
Well, we've spent
three hours together.
Absolutely--
>>HOROWITZ: I've enjoyed it.
>>REGINA: Absolutely
fascinating.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I just love this.
I will recommend to people.
Because every time, you
know, I go somewhere,
I'll run into someone--
oh, I see "Open Minds."
What would you recommend?
And I have to say,
these three hours
are among my very
top favorites--
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
>>REGINA: --of the last
14 years of doing this.
>>HOROWITZ: I so
appreciate that.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: You help us understand
how we got here, how people
subscribe to Gaia, you know?
>>HOROWITZ: It's our
family tree, you know?
I'd like to see this
as our family tree.
>>REGINA: Indeed.
>>HOROWITZ: We are connected,
and we do have a background.
>>REGINA: And what are
you working on right now?
So we will talk to you
in the future about that.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
I just finished
a new book called
"The Miracle Club," which is
coming out in fall of 2018.
And that is my
practical analysis
of positive mind philosophy,
why it works, how it works,
what works, and
what doesn't work.
It's called "The Miracle Club."
>>REGINA: Very good.
Can't wait to read it.
We'll come back when that's out.
>>HOROWITZ: Pleasure.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: Thank
you so much, Mitch.
I hope you've enjoyed
this series with Mitch
on the history of New Thought
and spirituality in America
as much as I have.
Again, the title of the
book is "Occult America."
And it can be purchased
through major booksellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]